Document cron (#167)
iov-one/docs: docs/weave/tutorial/11-cron.md

---
id: cron-tasks
title: Scheduled Tasks
sidebar_label: Scheduled Tasks
---

> In almost every real time software, the need to schedule jobs to be executed at a certain time in future is constant. In blockchain context, this could be sending tokens, distributing revenue, scheduling a proposal, basically anything that could be executed as a transaction(a change in state). One of the functionality missing in older blockchain protocols is assuring the execution time of a transaction precisely is impossible due to the [Probabilistic Finality](../basics/02-consensus.md#probabilistic-finality) nature of the consensus algorithms. One of the wonders of Tendermint Consensus engine is we can approximately predict the execution time of a block thanks to [Immediate Finality](../basics/02-consensus.md#immediate-finality).

Author: What do you think of ``` The early generation of blockchain protocols had a hard time assuring the execution time of a transaction precisely is impossible due to the [Probabilistic Finality](../basics/02-consensus.md#probabilistic-finality) nature of the consensus algorithms```

> In almost every real time software, the need to schedule jobs to be executed at a certain time in future is constant. In blockchain context, this could be sending tokens, distributing revenue, scheduling a proposal, basically anything that could be executed as a transaction(a change in state). One of the functionality missing in older blockchain protocols is assuring the execution time of a transaction precisely is impossible due to the [Probabilistic Finality](../basics/02-consensus.md#probabilistic-finality) nature of the consensus algorithms. One of the wonders of Tendermint Consensus engine is we can approximately predict the execution time of a block thanks to [Immediate Finality](../basics/02-consensus.md#immediate-finality).

Reviewer: Maybe it is just me, but I still don't understand it.

> In the earlier generations of blockchain protocols it was impossible to use synchronize wall clock value. Instead using a wall clock, ?vector clock? was used.

I don't know if this is describing the same. Maybe @webmaster128 will know better.

> In almost every real time software, the need to schedule jobs to be executed at a certain time in future is constant. In blockchain context, this could be sending tokens, distributing revenue, scheduling a proposal, basically anything that could be executed as a transaction(a change in state). One of the functionality missing in older blockchain protocols is assuring the execution time of a transaction precisely is impossible due to the [Probabilistic Finality](../basics/02-consensus.md#probabilistic-finality) nature of the consensus algorithms. One of the wonders of Tendermint Consensus engine is we can approximately predict the execution time of a block thanks to [Immediate Finality](../basics/02-consensus.md#immediate-finality).

Reviewer 2: As far as I can tell, the correctness of timestamps and finality are unrelated. The problem is that (partially because of varying block times), the mining time is not part of the block validation. So a miner can put basically every time in there and the network will accept it as a correct block. This leads to potential attacks where a miner can change the field in a way favourable to them. In Tendermint, the time stamp must be in a very small range in order for other validator's to accept a proposed block as valid.

Those dimensions (finality and timestamp guarantees) are independent, as all of those 4 combinations are possible
1. No instant finality/no timestamp guarantees: e.g. Ethereum
2. Instant finality/no timestamp guarantees: any other instant finality protocol that does not care about block creation timestamps
3. No instant finality/Timestamp guarantees: a protocol with probabilistic finality, that supports forks, but creation time is part of the block validation (e.g. some time range relative to the current time and previous block time)
4. Instant finality/Timestamp guarantees: e.g. Tendermint

### Ticker

[Ticker interface](https://github.com/iov-one/weave/blob/master/cron.go#L11-L27) defines the API of the executor of the scheduled jobs.

```go
// Ticker is an interface used to call background tasks scheduled for
// execution.
type Ticker interface {
    // Tick is a method called at the beginning of the block. It should be
    // used to execute any scheduled tasks.
    //
    // Because beginning of the block does not allow for an error response
    // this method does not return one as well. It is the implementation
    // responsibility to handle all error situations.
    // In case of an error that is an instance specific (ie database
    // issues) it might be neccessary for the method to terminate (ie
    // panic). An instance specific issue means that all other nodes most
    // likely succeeded processing the task and have different state than
    // this instance. This means that this node is out of sync with the
    // rest of the network and cannot continue operating as its state is
    // invalid.
    Tick(ctx Context, store CacheableKVStore) TickResult
}
```

> Default Ticker implementation processes messages in order of execution time, starting with the oldest, in short words FIFO. But if you require a LIFO task queue you can implement it easily.

Author: Yeah you are right.

## Tutorial

### Message

In [CreateArticleMsg](https://github.com/iov-one/blog-tutorial/blob/master/x/blog/codec.proto#L92-L104) we defined a field named as `delete_at` that defines the deletion time of the article that will initated by CRON. During the creation of CreateArticleHandler scheduler is defined as a part of the struct:

### Scheduler Handler

```go
type CreateArticleHandler struct {
    auth      x.Authenticator
    ab        *ArticleBucket
    bb        *BlogBucket
    dtb       *DeleteArticleTaskBucket
    scheduler weave.Scheduler
}
```

> _weave.Scheduler_ will be initiated and passed to the handler on the application layer.

Author: Nice that you've noticed it, _application layer_ is just a term I come up with that refers to the logic in `weave/cmd/bnsd/app` folder. I needed a general term that conceptualizes the application where the modules and decorators wrapped together. I'm open to suggestions.

> _weave.Scheduler_ will be initiated and passed to the handler on the application layer.

Reviewer: Application might be a very broad term. Depending on whom you ask, you get a different answer.

For me an application could be what in [`bnsd` is called as stack](https://github.com/iov-one/weave/blob/566985b1ff2b0bfd9033b42cc2d6a72d9d4ce6b8/cmd/bnsd/app/app.go#L124-L127). I don't like the name stack and I think using application would both match better and provide a better description.

For me an application is an object that contains state and can process messages. An application is case of `bnsd` consists of layers (handlers, router, middlewares, etc.), but that is a non-crucial implementation detail.
Following this naming, `bnsd` consists of two applications - "the usual" :wink: and cron. We don't have yet a better name for the first application.

If we were to use my working, I would write that _weave.Scheduler is created during application assempbling_. It is not mandatory to pass scheduler to each handler that cron is using. This is a possiblity, not a requirement.

Does this help?

[The code](https://github.com/iov-one/blog-tutorial/blob/master/x/blog/handler.go#L358-L363) that schedules a job to be processed in future is below:

```go
// schedule delete task
	if msg.DeleteAt != 0 {
		deleteArticleMsg := &DeleteArticleMsg{

> 			Metadata:  msg.Metadata,

Author: Hmm can you explain more?

> 			Metadata:  msg.Metadata,

Reviewer: `Metadata` is currently only one field structure, containing `schema` field only. Schema field determines which schema version given entity is in.

https://github.com/iov-one/weave/blob/530b1c06180512361d104373f6c8572e1462d3bd/codec.proto#L12-L14

There are two reasons why copying a metadata must never be done:
- two entities, even if representing an entity with the same ID, can be in different schema state. Their metadata will be different.
- metadata is a structure so that it can be extended. There was a proposal [to add modification time](https://github.com/iov-one/weave/issues/661). It is very likely that more attributes will be added. The new field will most likely have a value unique to each instance.

> 			Metadata:  msg.Metadata,

Author: Coming back here to close this task https://github.com/iov-one/docs/issues/168.
How do we determine the schema info for the metadata? For example, the current version of `bnsd` does not contain any model with schema other than 1. Let's say if I were to add a new migration then do I have bump every metadata schema value across the module?

> 			Metadata:  msg.Metadata,

Reviewer: Schema version is a mechanism to know what format an entity is. 
We version by the extension, because it is easier than by entity type.

All entities start with schema version 1. Let's say you have a `myblog` extension with an entity `BlogEntry`:

```protobuf
message BlogEntry {
    weave.Metadata metadata = 1;
    string content = 2;
}

message Comment {
  // ...
}
```

After using it for some time, you decide that each blog entry needs a title. Before title was included in the content, now it should be a separate field. What you do is to register a migration, telling how to transform each entity (model and message) of `myblog` extension from version 1 to 2. Migration is always by one version.

```protobuf
message BlogEntry {
    weave.Metadata metadata = 1;
    string content = 2; // It will not be used in newer schemas, but must never be removed.
    string title = 3;
    string body = 4;
}
```

```go
func init() {
            // init
            migration.MustRegister(1, &BlogEntry{}, migration.NoModification)
            migration.MustRegister(1, &Comment{}, migration.NoModification) 
            migration.MustRegister(1, &CreateBlogEntry{}, migration.NoModification)   
            migration.MustRegister(1, &CreateComment{}, migration.NoModification)   

            // second version
            migration.MustRegister(2, &BlogEntry{}, func(db weave.ReadOnlyKVStore, entry migration.Migratable) error {
                e = entry.(*BlogEntry)
                chunks := strings.SplitN(e.Content, '\n', 2) // naive
                e.Title, e.Body = chunks[0], chunks[1]
                return nil
            })
            migration.MustRegister(2, &Comment{}, migration.NoModification) 
            migration.MustRegister(2, &CreateBlogEntry{}, migration.NoModification)   
            migration.MustRegister(2, &CreateComment{}, migration.NoModification)   
}
```
Once deployed, send a message to bump the version of schema used by the `myblog` application. Code forever must support all cases of old and new schema.

Once the migration is executed, stored data is not migrated. It is migrated on the fly when fetched from the database using a bucket that supports migrations or when processing a message using a router that supports migration (all our extensions do both). When stored, it will be stored with the current active version (in this case 2).

Does this help?

---
id: cron-tasks
title: Scheduled Tasks
sidebar_label: Scheduled Tasks
---

> In almost every real time software, the need to schedule jobs to be executed at a certain time in

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In almost every realtime software, the need to schedule jobs to be executed at a certain time in
```

future is constant. In blockchain context, this could be sending tokens, distributing revenue,
scheduling a proposal, basically anything that could be executed as a transaction (a change of

> state). The early generation of blockchain protocols had a hard time assuring the execution time

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
state). The early generation of blockchain protocols had a hard time ensuring the execution time
```

> of a transaction precisely is impossible due to the indeterministic nature of the consensus algorithms.

Reviewer 3: Precisely because? I don't understand this line.

> One of the wonders of Tendermint Consensus engine is the ability to roughly approximate the execution time of a

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
One of the wonders of Tendermint Consensus engine is the ability to approximate the execution time of a
```

> future block thanks to **BFT Time feature**.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
future block thanks to the **BFT Time feature**.
```

[Tendermint BFT Time](https://github.com/tendermint/tendermint/blob/v0.32.7/docs/spec/consensus/bft-time.md) 
document is a very technical and complicated specification, but long story short, execution time of a proposed block is

> get by calculating the median of latest block's commit voting times.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
obtained by calculating the median of the latest block's commit voting times.
```

> [CRON](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/CRON) is no different than a regular message except the fact

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
[CRON](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/CRON) is no different than a regular message except 
```

that CRON tasks are initiated by a ticker and processed by a different handler that is not

> accesible from the route. This means you cannot access the CRON handler from outside but you can

Reviewer: This might need a better wording.

Some sentences before you write 

> Cron stack is a minimal router [...]

and here you write 

> [...] processed by a different handler that is not accesible from the route [...]
> [...] you can trigger a CRON task by a regular, routed handler.

I think the problem is in wording. 

Cron is not a router nor a handler. It is a functionality (mechanism?) that allows to schedule execution/handling of a message in the future. It can use any router instance in order to process scheduled messages. I don't know what exactly cron is in this context. I think it is important to figure this out and write at the beginning, using the same wording throughout this document.

I think it would be good to come up with a name for the functionality that is using cron and non-cron controlled routers.

trigger a CRON task by a regular, routed handler.

> - Executing CRON messages is almost no different from executing a message in

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Executing CRON messages is almost the same as executing a message in
```

the usual flow
- CRON can use the same or a different router to handle

> messages and therefore support the same of different set of messages

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
messages and therefore support the same or different set of messages
```

> - Using different handler allows configuring which messages can be processed the same

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Using different handler allows configuring which messages can be processed by the same
```

> handler and message can be used both by usual router and cron

Reviewer: Here the "non cron" is called _a usual router_. A good name is needed :wink:

> handler and message can be used both by usual router and cron

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
handler and which message can be used both by usual router and cron
```

- CRON use a different authentication policy

### Scheduler

[Scheduler interface](https://github.com/iov-one/weave/blob/master/cron.go#L43-L55) defines an
API to schedule a task for a time in future with the conditions that are eligible to execute the
tasks.

```go
// Scheduler is an interface implemented to allow scheduling message execution.
type Scheduler interface {
    // Schedule queues given message in the database to be executed at
    // given time. Message will be executed with context containing
    // provided authentication addresses.
    // When successful, returns the scheduled task ID.
    Schedule(KVStore, time.Time, []Condition, Msg) ([]byte, error)

    // Delete removes a scheduled task from the queue. It returns
    // ErrNotFound if task with given ID is not present in the queue.
    Delete(KVStore, []byte) error
}
```

**Warning:** Due to the implementation details, transaction is guaranteed to be executed after
given time, but not exactly at given time. If another transaction is already scheduled for the
exact same time, execution of this transaction is delayed until the next free slot.

> **Important Note:** An authentication address, Condition, is passed to the scheduler because: In

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
**Important Note:** An authentication address, Condition, is passed to the scheduler because, in
```

the usual flow, before processing the message, signature is validated to authenticate and later

> authorize. In CRON this is not the case, because what a normal message creates a new message that

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
authorize. In CRON this is not the case, because what a normal message creates is a new message that
```

says "CRON do X" and the signature of this message is not present in the context. It is
impossible to sign a message for scheduler without the private key.
Instead, the signature check step is bypassed and desired conditions are set in the context when
processing given scheduled message.

Absence of signature could be security hole if a developer implements the CRON feature poorly.

> Happily only code can schedule a CRON task and decide on conditions, so this should never be an

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Happily, only code can schedule a CRON task and decide on conditions, so this should never be an
```

be initated by CRON. During the creation of CreateArticleHandler scheduler is defined as a part
of the struct:

### Scheduler Handler

```go
type CreateArticleHandler struct {
    auth      x.Authenticator
    ab        *ArticleBucket
    bb        *BlogBucket
    dtb       *DeleteArticleTaskBucket
    scheduler weave.Scheduler
}
```

_weave.Scheduler_ will be initiated and passed to the handler on the application layer.

[The code](https://github.com/iov-one/blog-tutorial/blob/master/x/blog/handler.go#L358-L363) that
schedules a job to be processed in future is below:

```go
// schedule delete task
	if msg.DeleteAt != 0 {
		deleteArticleMsg := &DeleteArticleMsg{
			Metadata:  &weave.Metadata{Schema: 1},
			ArticleID: article.ID,
		}

		var taskID []byte
		taskID, err = h.scheduler.Schedule(store, article.DeleteAt.Time(), nil, deleteArticleMsg)
		if err != nil {
			return nil, errors.Wrap(err, "cannot schedule deletion task")
		}

		// save delete article task so it could be cancelled later
		deleteArticleTask := &DeleteArticleTask{
			Metadata:  deleteArticleMsg.Metadata,
			ID:        taskID,
			ArticleID: article.ID,
			TaskOwner: x.MainSigner(ctx, h.auth).Address(),

> 		}

Reviewer: Here you create an entity for the deletion taks. This is not wrong, although might be not necessary.

In `x/gov` package, proposal entity contains information of a related cron task. Including reference in the entity this task is about might make the relation and code structure easier.

https://github.com/iov-one/weave/blob/master/x/gov/codec.proto#L147

Author: I am aware of that implementation, but a separate entity seemed like a better solution that makes readers of the docs understand task concept.

		if err := h.dtb.Put(store, deleteArticleTask); err != nil {
			return nil, errors.Wrap(err, "cannot store delete article task")
		}
	}
```

If the create message contains a DeleteAt value, `deleteArticleMsg` will be initiated and
scheduled with no condition. Don't get scared by **with no condition** words, the CRON router

> will not be accessible to the world anyways.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
will not be accessible to the world anyway.
```

Let's say we want a message that could be executed only when an **admin's** condition is present

> in the context. For this, the handler that will execute message must check the if the admin's

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
in the context. For this, the handler that will execute message must check if the admin's
```

condition is in the context and then execute accordingly. In order to pass this authentication
information to the CRON handler you need to feed the condition to the scheduler:

`taskID, err = h.scheduler.Schedule(store, article.DeleteAt.Time(), adminCond, deleteArticleMsg)`

In the code example above we also defined a `taskID` that will be used to identify the task among

> other deletion tasks, with this information we can delete or modify the task after scheduling

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
other deletion tasks; with this information we can delete or modify the task after scheduling
```

process is over.

As you can see `deleteArticleTask` is saved to the store with article ID and task owner address
to authorize modification to the task.

Via the article ID field, scheduled tasks could be queried with articles.

## Executor Handler

Executor Handler in this context refers to the handler that will execute the task that is
received from the application ticker. We implemented the deletion scheduling logic within
`CreateArticleHandler`, now we have to implement the consumer logic, which is
`CronDeleteArticleHandler`.

`Deliver` method of `CronDeleteArticleHandler`:

```go
// Deliver stages a scheduled deletion if all preconditions are met
func (h CronDeleteArticleHandler) Deliver(ctx weave.Context, store weave.KVStore, tx weave.Tx) (*weave.DeliverResult, error) {
	msg, err := h.validate(ctx, store, tx)
	if err != nil {
		return nil, err
	}

	if err := h.b.Delete(store, msg.ArticleID); err != nil {
		return nil, errors.Wrapf(err, "cannot delete article with ID %s", msg.ArticleID)

> 	}

Reviewer: Do you want to modify related `DeleteArticleTask` entity as well?

	return &weave.DeliverResult{}, nil
}
```

> As you can see there is no authentication checks, it is because we designed cron handlers to be

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
As you can see there is no authentication check, it is because we designed cron handlers to be
```

inaccesible to the world via a query so we can implement our execution without any fears of

> exploitation.

Reviewer: This is not completely true.

Currently, it is possible to not have any authentication in any handler, as there is nothing forcing you to do it. An example is this handler, that does not call `auth.HasAddress`. 
This handler could call `auth.HasAddress`, because `ctx` contains condition as specified during task creation.

What I am saying is that no authentication is a choice. Authentication is possible, but not enforced.

This handler will receive the `DeleteArticleMsg`, delete the article from the store using the
article ID data that is passed along with the message.

## Task Cancellation

> If we need the ability to do execution in distant future, we also need the ability to cancel the

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If we need the ability to do execution in the distant future, we also need the ability to cancel the
```

same execution. As you remember we saved the scheduled task information to the store to be used

> in various post-submission activities. Deletion is the simplest example of this case. As you read

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
in various post-submission activities. Deletion is the simplest example of this case. As you have read
```

> many many times, and probably got very used to, every action in Weave goes through an handler. We

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
many many times, and probably got very used to, every action in Weave goes through a handler. We
```

> will create a handler that is called `CancelDeleteArticleTaskHandler`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
will create a handler called `CancelDeleteArticleTaskHandler`.
```

> `validate` method:

Reviewer: This line is not needed, as the first line of code starts with the method name :wink:

```go
// validate does all common pre-processing between Check and Deliver
func (h CancelDeleteArticleTaskHandler) validate(ctx weave.Context, store weave.KVStore, tx weave.Tx) (*CancelDeleteArticleTaskMsg, error) {
	var msg CancelDeleteArticleTaskMsg

	if err := weave.LoadMsg(tx, &msg); err != nil {
		return nil, errors.Wrap(err, "load msg")
	}

	var task DeleteArticleTask
	if err := h.b.One(store, msg.TaskID, &task); err != nil {
		return nil, errors.Wrapf(err, "delete task with id %s not found", msg.TaskID)
	}

	signer := x.MainSigner(ctx, h.auth).Address()
	if !task.TaskOwner.Equals(signer) {
		return nil, errors.Wrapf(errors.ErrUnauthorized, "signer %s is unauthorized to cancel scheduled delete article task with id %s", signer, msg.TaskID)
	}

	return &msg, nil
}
```

> Since cancellation of tasks requries to be initiated by a user signed message, we need to

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Since cancellation of tasks must be initiated by a user-signed message, we need to
```

> explicitly check if user signature is in the context, same as every other regular handler.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
check explicitly if the user signature is in the context, same as every other regular handler.
```

> If the task desired to be cancelled exists and task owner is the signer of the address, execution

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If the task you want to cancel exists and the task owner is the signer of the address, execution
```

proceeds to the `Deliver` method:

```go
// Deliver cancels delete task if conditions are met
func (h CancelDeleteArticleTaskHandler) Deliver(ctx weave.Context, store weave.KVStore, tx weave.Tx) (*weave.DeliverResult, error) {
	msg, err := h.validate(ctx, store, tx)
	if err != nil {
		return nil, err
	}

	if err := h.scheduler.Delete(store, msg.TaskID); err != nil {
		return nil, errors.Wrapf(err, "cannot delete scheduled task with id %s", msg.TaskID)
	}

	if err := h.b.Delete(store, msg.TaskID); err != nil {
		return nil, errors.Wrapf(err, "cannot cancel delete task with id %s", msg.TaskID)
	}

	return &weave.DeliverResult{Data: msg.TaskID}, nil
}
```

> First, task gets **descheduled** using the task ID present in the message and then deleted from

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
First, the task gets **descheduled** using the task ID present in the message and then deleted from
```

the task store.

## CRON Stack

As we mentioned before, CRON handlers are no different than regular handlers but they differ in
one point: CRON operates in a totally different stack than the application.

> We need to define a seperate routes for our CRON stack in the blog module:

Reviewer: Instead of _we need_ I would write _we can_ as this is not mandatory, but a good practice.

> We need to define a seperate routes for our CRON stack in the blog module:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We need to define a separate route for our CRON stack in the blog module:
```

}
```

And then we need a weave.Handler builder that will wrap the CRON application:

```go
func CronStack() weave.Handler {
	rt := app.NewRouter()

	authFn := cron.Authenticator{}

	// Cron is using custom router as not the same handlers are registered.
	blog.RegisterCronRoutes(rt, authFn)

	decorators := app.ChainDecorators(
		utils.NewLogging(),
		utils.NewRecovery(),
		utils.NewKeyTagger(),
		utils.NewActionTagger(),
		// No fee decorators.
	)
	return decorators.WithHandler(rt)
}
```

And last we need a `Ticker` that will process the scheduled messages:

```go
ticker := cron.NewTicker(CronStack(), CronTaskMarshaler)
```

We feed the ticker to the base application:

```go
// Application constructs a basic ABCI application with
// the given arguments.
func Application(name string, h weave.Handler,
	tx weave.TxDecoder, dbPath string, debug bool) (app.BaseApp, error) {

	ctx := context.Background()
	kv, err := CommitKVStore(dbPath)
	if err != nil {
		return app.BaseApp{}, errors.Wrap(err, "cannot create database instance")
	}
	store := app.NewStoreApp(name, kv, QueryRouter(), ctx)
	base := app.NewBaseApp(store, tx, h, ticker, debug)
	return base, nil
}
```

> ## Conclusion

Reviewer: No conclusion? :wink:
